Subject: [PATCH] Generate reproducible output independently of the build-path
To: GCC Patches <gcc-patches@gcc.gnu.org>
Cc: Ximin Luo <infinity0@pwned.gg>

(Please keep me on CC, I am not subscribed)

Background
==========

Previous background is here: https://gcc.gnu.org/ml/gcc-patches/2016-11/msg00182.html

Upon further discussion we decided to rename the environment variable to
BUILD_PATH_PREFIX_MAP and to add support for multiple mappings. We have also
prepared a specification that describes all of this in detail, so that other
projects can be confident that they are all interoperable:

https://reproducible-builds.org/specs/build-path-prefix-map/

The specification is currently in DRAFT status, awaiting some final feedback,
including what the GCC maintainers think about it.

Proposal
========

This patch series adds a new environment variable BUILD_PATH_PREFIX_MAP. When
this is set, GCC will treat this as extra implicit "-fdebug-prefix-map=$value"
command-line arguments that precede any explicit ones. This makes the final
binary output reproducible, and also hides the unreproducible value (the source
path prefixes) from CFLAGS et. al. which many build tools (understandably)
embed as-is into their build output.

This environment variable also acts on the __FILE__ macro, mapping it in the
same way that debug-prefix-map works for debug symbols. We have seen that
__FILE__ is also a very large source of unreproducibility, and is represented
quite heavily in the 3k+ figure given earlier.

Finally, we tweak the mapping algorithm so that it applies only to whole path
components when matching prefixes. This algorithm contains fewer corner cases
and it is easier for users to figure out how to set the mapping appropriately.

More details are given in the headers of the patch files themselves.

Testing
=======

I've tested these patches on a Debian testing/unstable x86_64-linux-gnu system.
So far I've only run the new tests that this patch adds, on a disable-bootstrap
build. I will do a full bootstrap and run the full testsuite over the next few
days, both with and without this patch, and report back.

Copyright disclaimer
====================

I dedicate these patches to the public domain by waiving all of my rights to
the work worldwide under copyright law, including all related and neighboring
rights, to the extent allowed by law.

See https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/legalcode for full text.

Please let me know if the above is insufficient and I will be happy to sign any
relevant forms.
